[SWOOSH]
[THEME MUSIC]
>> It's great to be here.
It really is.
And in preparation for this,
the challenge is always,
how do I pare this down
to an hour-and-a-half?
So I put together a program
that covers a lot of stuff,
but not the individual
things in the depth
that I would ordinarily like.
And here we go.
So I think what
we're going to do
is we're just going
to jump right into it.
Any of you guys out there
ever read or heard of the book
"Hamlet's Mill?"
A lot of you.
That's great.
I knew you would, yeah.
That's been one of the early
books that came out in 1969.
And I might have actually
made my first attempt
to get through it
right around that time.
It's a deep and complex book.
But the gist of it is that the
authors, Giorgio Santillana
and Hertha von Dechend,
realized that there
was a lot more to the story
of what ancient peoples knew.
And they realized that
they based their long-range
computation of time on
the precessional cycle
of the equinoxes, which is
a roughly 26,000 year cycle.
How many of you are
familiar with the concept
of the great year?
OK, so now there's been
different versions of that.
The Chinese version is a little
different than the Persian,
and that's a little
different from the Greek.
But overall, most
ancient cultures
had this concept that
there was a hierarchy
of cyclical phenomena.
And they saw a resonance or
a relationship, almost a--
what would you call it--
a fractal relationship
between the cycles that we're
all familiar with from our day
to day lives, such as
the diurnal cycle, which
is the daily cycle of the
Earth rotating on its axis,
then the annual cycle of the
Earth going around the sun.
But then they saw-- which
gives us our annual year.
But then they saw that
there were greater cycles.
And the tradition that
has come down to us
is that it's within
these greater cycles
that things happen
that sometimes change
the entire face of the globe.
And this is where I'm going to
start my discussion tonight,
about that.
I think many of us know that
modern humans have now been
dated based on actual datable
skeletal remains going back
180,000 to 200,000 years.
No telling how far back our
species of Homo sapiens sapiens
goes beyond that, but I always
stayed to the conservative side.
So for years, I was saying
modern humans went back 150,000
years, then it's been
pushed back to 180,000.
Now it looks like there are
skeletal remains that go back
200,000 years.
And I like people to contemplate
how far we've come in the last,
say, 300 years.
And I pointed out that when
I was born in the mid-20th
century, we had no--
basically, computers
were just being invented.
We had no presence
in space at all.
Most Americans didn't
even have televisions.
And I still have one of my very
early memories of my father
bringing home a television
and unboxing it,
and how exciting that was.
I must have been
maybe three years old.
When my grandfathers were
born and grandmothers,
the main mode of
transportation on Earth
was foot or horseback or mules.
It was not-- there
were trains, of course,
but I say that
because I want people
to think about how quick,
how far we've come,
say in 120 years, or just
really four or five generations.
And then I want you to think
about if you have a span of time
that we modern humans have
been on this Earth for a couple
of 100,000 years, and you figure
that a generation is 25 years.
What that means is that there's
probably been at least 7,000
generations of humans.
Now, if you think about the
beginning of the Industrial
revolution, when that
began, if we go back,
say, to the late 1700 up to
the mid-1800s right in there.
And you consider how far
we've come since then.
In fact, let's go
back a little further
to the scientific enlightenment.
We'll allow ourselves 300 years.
How easily would it be for 300
years of progress to get lost
in the noise of 200,000 years?
And this is my beef
with modern archeology,
is they've got this entrenched
model of hunter-gatherer
was the dominant lifestyle
for all of these generations.
And somehow, even
though we acknowledge
that they would have
been as intelligent as we
modern people are, with the same
size cranial capacity and so on,
nobody ever really
invented anything that
could be construed as science.
There was no accumulated
knowledge apparently passed
on from generation
to generation that
would have allowed the human
species, our predecessors
and ancestors, to
transcend a brute existence
of hunter-gathering, maybe
later subsistence farming.
I think that model is
now completely obsolete.
And I think, when you look at
the archaeological establishment
and the profession,
I think there
are signs that they're
getting desperate to protect
that entrenched narrative.
And we'll also
mention that there's
a mutually reinforcing
thing going
on here between the geologists
who were trained in gradualism,
the Darwinists, the
paleontologists who
are trained in incremental
evolutionary change.
And what we've seen, I think, is
that's been blown completely out
of the water.
The last couple of decades
have shown that, yeah,
that change, really the
way we observe change
is not necessarily linear,
but it is very much more
like ancient people saw
it, which was cyclical.
So that's where I'm going to get
into here, talking about some
of the evidence
for cyclical change
and how the knowledge
of this cyclical change
has come down to us,
and what it may mean
for us in our own future now.
So this is a quote I really
love from "Hamlet's Mill."
"The task then was to
discover from the remote past
an utterly lost science, linked
to an equally lost culture--
one in which anthropologists
have seen only illiterate
primitive man."
So this was a major
challenge that
was thrown down back in 1969.
What has happened
to the interim?
Well, there was a lot
of resistance to this.
A lot of-- a lot of claims that
they were crackpots and fringe
scientists.
Never mind that they were
highly respected professors
in their respective
fields, never mind
that they amassed an
enormous amount of evidence.
It was much easier to just
say they're out on the fringe
and we don't really need
to look at the evidence
that they have amassed.
So one of the other sources
that I've used was--
you may have heard of
Will and Ariel Durant.
They wrote an 11-volume
history of civilization.
After spending a lifetime
cataloging and documenting
the history of
civilization on Earth,
Will Durant was
moved to say this,
because this is the realization.
If you want to-- in one
sentence, his insight
that he took away from 40
or 50 years of studying
the history of civilization
on planet Earth was this.
"Civilization exists
by geological consent,
subject to change
without notice."
And I think once
we incorporate this
into our paradigm of thinking
about the ancient past,
we're going to come to a much
greater understanding of why--
See, the critics, people who
will attack Graham Hancock
over ancient apocalypse right?
If you read through the
criticism and the attacks
on him-- how many of you
saw that, by the way?
Quite a few of you, yes.
Now, how many of you saw
that in your takeaway
after watching the
episodes of it was that,
oh, Graham Hancock is a racist
and a white supremacist?
How many of you that
was the takeaway?
And yet, right across the board,
every single critique and attack
that I read, and probably
at least 9 or 10 of them
from different sources--
from the media, from the
archaeological profession,
and so on--
they were all reading
from the same script.
That became very obvious.
So, what is the motive here?
I think the motive, again,
it's always the same--
control the
narrative of history.
If you can deprive people
of an authentic history,
that is one major component
in getting control
of a culture or a society.
And whenever we see
authoritarian or totalitarian
regimes come into place,
that's always consistent,
is to do everything you can
to erase the authentic history
and replace it with
a contrived history.
And I think that's
what we're actually
witnessing going on right now.
So let's go on here,
Chartres Cathedral.
I'm very fascinated
by the great--
well, I'm a builder
by profession,
so I'm very fascinated by the
art of building, architecture
design, and so on.
So I've drawn heavily upon
architecture and building,
because what I realized early
on in my studies going way back
in the '70s was that
architecture was being used
as a venue for
transmitting, preserving,
and transmitting knowledge.
And I think all of you in
here have an understanding
that that's going
to be the case,
whether it's in Egypt, whether
it's in Greece, whether it
was the monumental earthworks
of East and North America.
Whether it was the handiwork of
the predecessors of the Incas
in South America, whether it
was the Gothic cathedrals.
In all of these
cases, what we see
is that they serve
as repositories
of knowledge of what I would
argue is scientific knowledge.
Scientific knowledge.
So the Chartres Cathedral,
if you haven't visited,
I highly recommend it.
I could have spent
way much longer time
than I did there because
it is just loaded
with data and information.
And, of course, the vehicle
for the preservation
and transmission of that
information is symbolism.
So it's critically
important in order
to understand the mind
of our ancient ancestors
to become imbued with
the system of symbolism
and how symbolism is used
to propagate information.
Modern science uses
all kinds of symbolism.
There's a little
difference, though,
between the symbolism of
modern science, which is always
honing in on having a very
narrow and precise meaning
for a given symbol.
Whereas in the ancient
world, the power and potency
of a symbol was based on how
many things, how many variations
on a theme could you incorporate
into a single symbol.
So I'm going to show
you a symbol that
was one of the more
important symbols
that we find in many places.
We find it in
Vedic architecture,
we find it in
Gothic architecture,
we find it represented
in the numerical basis
to a lot of sacred texts.
Probably many of
that our own Bible
in the Judeo-Christian tradition
was originally written,
Old Testament in Hebrew
and New Testament in Greek.
Well, most of you may have
been aware of the fact
that prior to the advent of the
Hindu-Arabic numeral system,
the Hebrew alphabet
and the Greek alphabets
had a dual purpose,
a dual function.
They not only stood for
letters of the alphabet,
but they also stood for
the numbers that were used.
So if you get a copy of a
Hebrew bible or a Greek bible,
you will actually see Chapter
1 in the Hebrew will be aleph.
Chapter 2 will be beit,
ghimel, dalet, hey, vav, zain,
cheit, and so forth
through the alphabet.
And then what you
also discover is
that if you take a given
word or name or phrase,
you can substitute the letter
for the numerical value.
Now, this is a
system that's part
of a tradition called Kabbalah.
And within Kabbalah, the system
of gematria, or gematria,
is about translating
these sacred scripts
according to the numbers.
Well, when you do that,
something very interesting
happens.
You discover that
there is a meaning
and a system to those numbers.
And in fact, I go so far to say
that the outer literary forms
and the stories and the
allegories and so forth
is simply the vehicle for
transmitting and preserving
the mathematical underlying
foundation of the whole thing,
which is very scientific.
Gematria is related to the
word geometria, or geometry.
And as it turns out, these
numerical relationships actually
can yield geometric numbers,
which could be proportions,
and ratios, and so forth.
And what happens then is,
this to me is so fascinating,
is that if you start translating
these sacred writings according
to the numbers, and then you
begin to analyze the numbers
and the interrelations of those
numbers, what you discover
is that you're really
being led right
into the realm of geometry.
And the geometric
forms that come forward
as you're doing
this interpretation,
are precisely the
forms of geometry
that were used to
design and build
the great sacred structures
all through history
and through across the world,
which to me is an amazing thing.
Once you begin to understand
the basis of design,
whether it's a Gothic cathedral
or a truncated pyramidal mound
along the Ohio river,
what you realize
is that when you look at
the system of geometry,
when you look at the
system of archaeoastronomy,
the orientation that was used in
these structures, when you look
at the underlying
geological considerations,
how these structures
are not randomly placed.
They're placed with
knowledge and precision
about the underlying geology.
That's not quite so well-known
as the fact that is now
being accepted
even by mainstream
that there is an
astronomical component.
But when you take
all of these things
together, what you realize
is that all of these master
builders, through the ages, were
working from the same template.
Now, this to me is a
very amazing thing,
which begs for some
kind of an explanation.
What was the source
of this template?
Who was disseminating
this template?
So I'm going to leave
that there and I'm going
to move on here with one of
the geometric forms here.
So this is called the
Portal of Judgment.
It's Chartres Cathedral.
Couple of things
are interesting.
This is like if you look at
Chartres Cathedral as a book,
and you consider
a book will have
an introduction or a
foreword that gives you
a synopsis of what
the whole book
and what the implications
and meaning of the book is.
This Portal of
Judgment, which is
the entryway into the
cathedral, is like a statement.
It's an introductory statement.
Now, when you approach it,
one of the things you will see
is this, the tympanum,
the area above the door.
And you see the seated
figure of Christ.
And Christ is seated
within a geometric figure
called the vesica piscis.
And the vesica,
interestingly, we
find it shows up all over
cathedrals in Europe.
And when you look at these over
the many cathedrals in Europe
and abbeys and so on,
you find a repetition
of this vesica piscis.
Well, it occurs when you simply
draw a circle of a given radius,
and then you draw
a second circle
that's exactly the same size.
But the second circle,
its circumference
falls on the center
of the first one.
And that creates this overlap.
It's almost like a Venn diagram.
Well, out of this overlap
emerges the entire edifice
of geometry.
And from geometry, the entire
edifice of mathematics.
It's a very powerful feminine
symbol, and it serves as a womb.
Now, in this case,
Christ is in a role
here as gatekeeper
of this entryway
into, essentially, the
realm or world of geometry.
And you can't see
any more too well,
but he holds in his left hand
a book that's been broken here.
But the book is closed
and it's locked.
The idea is that you have to
prove yourself worthy before you
can enter this realm.
Now, you've probably heard
the saying that Pythagoras
had a subscription over the
door to his academy that said,
let none enter here who
are ignorant of geometry.
And many of you probably
know what the G stands
for in the Masonic tradition.
Geometry was considered to
be a key to understanding,
not only the hidden and visible
esoteric relationships of space,
but also of time.
So surrounding the
figure of Christ here,
we see four creatures.
Down on the lower left,
we see a winged lion.
Above that, we see an angel.
Over to the right,
we see an eagle.
And to the lower
right, we see the bull.
These represent the four
fixed signs of the zodiac--
the bull, the lion,
the eagle, and the man.
So you have the bull is Taurus.
The eagle is standing
in for Scorpio
because the
constellation of Aquila,
the eagle rises at the
same time as Scorpio does.
And so it can serve
as a time marker
to indicate that
same period of time.
So you have Aquarius, you
have Leo, you have Scorpio,
and you have Taurus.
Those represent the four
fixed signs of the Zodiac.
And you know that--
how many of you know what the
precession of the equinoxes is?
Most of you, yes.
This is critically
important because this
was the cosmic clock that our
ancestors were obsessively
observing and monitoring.
It's a very slow process.
It traverses the
plane of the ecliptic,
which is orbital plane.
You probably know that there are
12 signs of the Zodiac arrayed
around.
For the last
roughly 2,000 years,
the vernal equinox has been
transiting across the star
cluster of Pisces.
It's now moving out of Pisces.
And sometime, depending
on exactly how
you define the
divisions, sometime
in the next 200 to
300 years or so,
it will be moving into the
star constellation of Aquarius.
Now, that rate is usually
measured at about 50 arcseconds
per year.
I'm not going to go through
the mathematics now.
In my workshops
and so forth, we do
get into all of that in the
detail necessary to really
understand it.
But 50 arcseconds per year
works out to be about--
if you use that exact number,
it works out to be 25,920 years
for a full precessional cycle.
So that means if we could back
up the precessional cycle 25,920
years, the vernal equinox was
exactly in the place in the sky
that it is now.
Does that make sense?
So this was the cosmic clock
that our ancient ancestors
were so obsessively observing,
apparently for generations.
And this was a point that the
authors of "Hamlet's Mill" made,
was that it must have in order
to identify that slow motion
of 50 arcseconds per year,
it would have required many
generations of observation.
Now to give you an idea
of 50 arcseconds per year,
you know that every circle
is divided into 360 degrees.
Every degree is divided into
60 minutes, or minute sections.
And each of those
minute sections
are divided further into a
second order of minuteness.
So you have degrees,
minutes, and seconds.
Now, ordinarily, unless
you're an astronomer who's
plotting the stellar
motion, you don't
need the degree of
precision that you're
going to get with arcseconds.
But if you take 50 arcseconds
and you divide that
into the full circle, what
you're going to realize
is that's how you're going
to find out that it traverses
about 1 degree every 72 years.
Now, if you go out and
you look at the night sky,
how do you determine
what 1 degree is?
Well, the simplest way is that a
full moon or the orb of the sun
is right at a half-a-degree.
So if you were to
picture two full moons
tangent to each other, that
would be 1 degree in the sky.
That is about how far the
precession of the equinoxes.
The equinoxes move from east
towards the west in 72 years.
Which I always find
interesting, because if you
think of it this way,
that's like 72 years,
that the great year
is one cosmic day.
It's in almost the same
relationship as one day does
to our annual year.
Now, of course, many of
that ancient cultures
all over the world
sometimes ran two calendars.
The real calendar that we're
using now, 365.24 days per year.
But then there was
a sacred calendar
of 360 days, an
idealized calendar.
And in that calendar, you
can think of it this way.
One year-- or 72
years is very close
to the average human lifespan.
72 years is 1/360 of the
full precessional cycle,
a great year.
So you can think of your
own life, give or take
a decade or two, as being
one day of the great year.
One day of the great year.
One cosmic day is right about
the same as one human life.
So anyways, the other thing
that was important here is that
if you divide that 25,920
years into 4 seasons,
so just like the 12 signs of
the Zodiac marked the 12 cosmic
months, then you
had 12 of those,
just like there are 12
months in the annular year.
So we have this
fractal thing going on,
this self-similarity thing.
But then just as
in our annual year,
there are four seasons
that were conceived to be
four seasons of the great year.
So each one of those would
have been one-fourth of 25,920,
which is 6,480 years.
Now, here's the
interesting thing.
That pulse of 6,480 years was
considered to be the pulse
or the timing or
tempo of catastrophes.
And this is one reason why
it was so damn important
to the ancient peoples.
Now, if you divide that
25,920 by 12, you get 2,160.
Which is the number
of years average
that the vernal equinox
would spend in each
of the 12 signs of the zodiac.
So let's keep moving here.
So this is, again, a quote
from "Hamlet's Mill."
"The Greeks still
had the old idea,
but they asked themselves
questions about it.
What moved was the sky,
but questions about the sky
posed abstruse problems.
The greatest was, of course,
the slow motion of the tilt
of the sky, described above,
which went through a Great Year
of 26,000 years."
So this is the standard
to round it off to 26,000.
And so in another great book by
David Fideler, "Jesus Christ,
Son of God," he analyzes
the esoteric and kabbalistic
connotations of
the New Testament.
He says this.
"Yet Aeon-- from which
we get our word eon,
which is a word describing
a cycle of time--
had another meaning, too,
in the ancient world,
which is frequently overlooked.
It referred to the
vast ages, the 12 Aeons
or Platonic Months--
these are the signs
of the Zodiac--
which make up the Great Year.
Because of precession
of the equinoxes,
the sun moves backward
through the Zodiac,
one degree every 72 years.
As we saw, the central symbol of
the Mithraic mysteries conceals
an astrological code
related to the precession
of the equinoxes."
Now, I should mention
that Mithraism
was, for a few centuries, the
main competitor to Christianity.
It's a very interesting
religion that
was pretty much
practiced by the Romans,
and it was inherited
from Persia.
And the Persian's Mithras--
the Roman god
Mithras was descended
from the Persian
god Mitra, who was
descended from the Vedic gods.
The Vedic god also called Mitra.
So there was this transmission
from the Vedas to Rome,
and then you had this major
competition between Christianity
and Mithraism.
Christianity won out,
but it adopted a lot
of the traditions of Mithraism.
For example, the date that's
given for the birth of Mithras
was December 25.
Now, December 25 is interesting
because it comes a few days
after winter solstice.
So cultures all over the world
were observing this motion
of the sun through the course
of a year and they saw clearly--
now, I'm referring to the
northern hemisphere now--
that the sun moved--
had a vast difference
between its high point
during summer solstice
and its low point
during winter solstice.
It actually turned out to
be about 47 degrees, which
is based upon the angular
tilt of Earth's axis.
And they saw that in the
summer, the days were long.
And then on summer solstice, it
got the longest day of the year.
Then you had the days
begin to shorten.
And on autumn equinox, they
would be almost virtually
the same.
And then they
continued to shorten--
the days they got
shorter, they got darker.
And on December 21, 22 was
the shortest day of the year.
And this was now--
light had gone into a
submission to darkness.
And it usually took--
solstice means standstill.
The sun stands
still at that point.
Get let it stand still
for a couple of days,
and then come around
to 24th or 25th.
To any observer, you're
going to see each day--
if you're watching, let's say,
the sunrise on the horizon,
which is something I highly
encourage people to do to help
really get a sense of the
cosmic wheels in motion
and how they work.
If we're in the
northern hemisphere,
we're looking towards
the east, what
we see is that the rising
position of the sun
is swinging back and forth.
From this latitude,
almost about 90 degrees
between its summer
solstice and its winter
solstice rising positions.
So each day, you're seeing the
sun moving further to the south.
As we move towards
winter solstice,
it's going slower each
day the amount of space
because it's moving the
fastest when it's due east.
But then it's slowing
down, it stops,
it hesitates for a few days,
and then it begins to return.
And so there was a
celebration that goes back
thousands of years observed
by many cultures that
was celebrating the return
of the sun, the return
of the light.
This is the origin
of our Christmas.
And I put together
a presentation
on getting into the astronomical
basis of our observation
of Christmas, which is, I
think, probably available
online on my website, if
you're interested in diving
into that deeper.
But let's keep moving.
So here's just a
very simple diagram
that shows the two
great planes that
are of consequence to what's
happening here on Earth.
We have the plane of the
ecliptic, which is unvarying.
The Earth is moving around the
sun in that defines that plane,
the orbital plane.
Projecting that plane out onto
the sky is the 8 degrees above,
8 degrees below.
Within that band, that's
the belt of the Zodiac.
And so that's the
zone of interest
to the ancient cultures,
was those constellations
that lay along that
plane of the ecliptic.
Now, again, I said
that, we all know this,
that the tilt of the
Earth is 23.5 degrees out
of perpendicular to
its orbital plane.
But that motion, see,
is not consistent.
It's doing this.
And that's what takes
the 26,000 years.
Now, the equinoxes, if you
look at this diagram here,
this would be the
equinoctial point right here,
with these two great
cosmic planes intersect.
And it's the motion, the
movement of that point.
That's the movement
of the vernal equinox.
Here's another variation on it.
You can see here that 12 signs
of the Zodiac arrayed around.
Here's the celestial equator.
And as the pole
here rotates around
in that precessional motion,
that point of intersection
is moving along this circle.
So that's what was being
observed by ancient cultures
all over the world.
If we were to actually go
out and look at the night sky
and we would see that
Polaris, and you see Polaris
right here at the bottom, that
is the current North Star.
If we were to back up half of
this cycle 13,000 years ago,
the North Star, if you were
trying to navigate by the North
Star, you're going to
get hopelessly lost.
The North Star was Vega up here.
So during the time, roughly
12,000 years ago with the vernal
equinoxes transiting the Age of
Leo, the North Star was Vega.
And the difference in the
night sky is that 47 degrees--
23.5 times 2.
So vertical, tilt 23.5,
now go around a semicircle
and you've got 23.5 twice,
and that's your 47 degrees.
If this is making sense.
So let's go back to the
vesica piscis and the symbols
for the four ages of the world.
Now, if we were able to take a
snapshot of the night sky now,
and then 13,000 years in
the future or 13,000 years
in the past, and project
that dome onto a flat plane,
you would have two
circles that overlap.
So there's a map of those
two snapshots, if you will,
of the night sky.
So when you project
those onto a flat plane,
it produces almost
a perfect vesica.
So the vesica now has
become a symbol, not only of
geometry in space, but
the geometry of time.
[THEME MUSIC]